Part 2 - Optimizing new AED units using a Graph Representation

The research goal that this second part of the project attempts to tackle, is to figure out the optimal coordinate of a potential newly introduced AED unit. We attempt to give answer to this by using a graph representation and thus the first obstacle of this task is to transform the problem into Network/graph terms. The graph has the following characteristics: we define a bipartite graph with two sets of subgraphs; the first set consists of the currently existing AED units, while the second subgraph is compromimed by the output of a clustering algorithm, DBSCAN to be specific in this case, of the interventions that are found in the dataset. There are no connections between nodes belong in the same graph, meaning with the AED set, or within the intervention_events group, but instead connections/edges are formed between nodes from the two groups. In other words an edge from an AED unit is formed to a intervention incident (in fact a the cluster of the intervention events) if and only if the AED unit is located in proximity to the intervention event such that it's guaranteed that the AED unit (if the unit is portable) or the patient can be transfered on time. These edges are, in fact weighted and the weights themselves reflect on the distance between the AED unit and the intervention event (project on eucledian distances). Each node in the intterventions set of nodes, among other holds a critical component with regards to how the graph is being optimized, the number of events that occured within proximity, which is directly related to the clustering process mentioned previously. In fact, when looking at specific region for which the number of intervention events is known, normalized over the degree, we expect that this ratio could be considered a good predictor of the necessity of an AED unit in proximity. These two, meaning the expected weight value of the weight for a connection and the ratio of the interventions over the number of in-degrees, define the objective function of this optimization task, which for clarity is:
(alpha * ratio) / ((1-alpha) * expected_weight), where alpha is weighting coefficient.
This objective function's purpose is obviously two-sided; on one hand we are trying to make sure that intervention events in proximity can adequtely be covered by the AED units in proximity and on the other hand we attempt to minimize the distnace between an intervention event and the AED unit aiming for hgiher survival rate. The optimization process is straightforward; we uniformly sample coordinates over Belgium and sequentially introduce new AED units to be placed such that the objective function mentioned above achieves the highest decrease for the loss value. Initia
Although, the hardware limitations did not allow us to run the proposed algorithm for the full dataset, we were able to confirm that over the first few iterations, the algorithm essentially attempts to place AED units in areas with really low availability or not availability at all, followed by AED units on more crowded areas that attempt to normalize the aforementioned ratio of intervention_count/in-degree.